[Music] today's lecture is going to be
destabilizing for you I think because
we're going to throw doubt on the usual intuition
that we have about the natural number system we
have this idea that the natural number system
is a very uniform and regular arena for doing
arithmetic in fact it's not at all so once we get
to larger and larger numbers almost everything
that we know starts to break down and continues
to break down further and further the more we go
this is very disconcerting and also sheds a lot
of Doubt on these grandio claims that we are in
possession of all natural numbers that's complete
nonsense okay so what we've been talking about is
complexity of a natural number it's a very
powerful but relatively simple notion that
captures how difficult it is to write down a given
natural number where we have various arithmetical
operations at our disposal so we had to look
at uh the complexity which I called triangular
complexity uh which is reasonably natural one
and we saw that very roughly we had a picture
something like this that if here is sort of the
scale of natural numbers from one up to say 10
triangle 10 and my favorite Z = 10 triangle 10 +
23 is just adjacent there that the complexity of
these numbers can be sort of visualized by a
graph that looks very roughly something like
this okay so this is a very distorted inaccurate
not to scale diagram but the complexity of most
of the numbers in here is roughly at the level
of 10 triangle 9 a tower of tens one less and uh
and the complexity is rather chaotic or almost
fractal likee most of the time it's hovering
around here I claim and every so often it goes
dipping down uh rather unpredictable fashion so
these dips going down here correspond to finding
a number that can be expressed very efficiently
for example say 10 triangle 8 a 10 triangle 8 is
a very very compact number because we can write
it down with 1 2 3 4 four symbols 10 triangle 8
this complexity is only four so this complexity
function goes plummeting down almost to uh to
zero for that particular number but that's a
big anomaly that's not very unrepresentative of
what typically happens typically the complexity
is up here so we want to get at this phenomena
but a little bit more concretely and precisely
so we want to say some precise things today about
complexity and we're going to aim towards this
claim that most numbers between one and Zed have
complexity well at least bigger than 10 triangle
4 and so are ultimately really invisible to us
this is going to throw a lot of questions and
doubt on a lot of things that we take for granted
okay so it's rather heretical lecture today but I
think it's really um a topic and a direction of
thinking that ought to be much much more well
understood by mathematics students what I'm going
to be doing today is not that complicated there's
a bit of inequalities that we're going to have
to work with but they're not too hard you'll see
that the argument is relatively simple and in fact
somewhat crude but nevertheless the consequences
are very striking so let's recall that if n is
is a natural number that its complexity C of n
or more precisely its triangular complexity C subt
of n is the minimum number of symbols chosen from
this collection of symbols for an arithmetical
expression for n and the symbols that we have at
our disposal here are the digits 0 to 9 there's
10 of them the plus sign the multiplication sign
the exponentiation sign the Triangular sign that
corresponds to our hyper operation of uh you know
Tower of exponents one on top of the other and
our left bracket and right bracket for organizing
things so for example the complexity of a th001 is
four because it requires four digits to write down
and that's the most efficient way of writing this
thing down however C of 1024 happens to be three
since we can write 1,24 as four exponent 5 four
to the 5 so there's only three symbols required
for that particular number so it's complexity is
three C of uh what is this uh 5,764 83 happens to
be five since this number can be written as 7
to the 8 + 2 so Al together we need one 2 3 4
five symbols its complexity is five this number
here which has quite a lot of more digits uh 3
6 9 12 14 digits so its complexity could be all
the way up to 14 but we claim that it's probably
nine since we can write this number down as 5 *
3 triangle 3 + 9 to nine and here we are using 1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 nine symbols now of course what I
did to get this is I wrote down this expression
first and then I evaluated it and then now I'm
claiming that the complexity is nine and I'm not
entirely sure about that it might be possible to
write this in a more compact way with some other
combination of exponents and uh triangular Powers
Etc now if I choose some somewhat random number
like this one which I think has 23 digits then my
guess is that its complexity is 23 so in this case
I've just written down randomly 23 digits so it's
a pretty good guess that its complexity is 23 but
it's not entirely clear and actually finding out
whether that's the case or not is uh problematic
it's not so easy okay so that's complexity
or triangular complexity of a natural number
expressing how much work is required to write this
number down in some efficient clever way so it's a
little bit like compression of images if you have
a an image that you want to transfer uh over the
internet then if it has many many pixels then it
might be quite a lot of information and so it's
useful to be able to compress these things and
that's sort of what we're doing here it's kind
of a compression of of information using our
arithmetical operations but in this case we
are not interested in loss of information so we
actually want to compress our number without any
loss of information so we want to be able
to recover completely the number from the
arithmetical expression that we're considering
so we want to make some observations about
complexity and of course finding the complexity
C of n for a particular natural number n is is
rather difficult in general but it turns out that
we can make General statements in a simpler and
easier fashion so what we're going to be doing is
using counting and estimation here are our bunch
of symbols that we're using then there is 16 of
them let's refer to that number as K so there are
K symbols at our disposal and we're going to often
just operate with K because later on we might want
to augment meant these symbols make k a little
bit bigger so although we're mostly interested in
k equal 16 we'll often have General Expressions
involving K and we're interested in using these
symbols as we've said to create mathematical
expressions like this one here but we're also
going to be interested in sort of more General
considerations where we're going to consider
more General words that can be created from these
symbols not necessarily representing legitimate
mathematical operations or Expressions okay so
this we recognize as a legitimate mathematical
expression we could evaluate that to a natural
number this thing on the other hand looks a bit
funny it's not a proper mathematical expression
it's just sort of a random list of symbols from
our symbol set nevertheless it's going to be
useful for us to consider these kinds of more
General words because they're easier to count
than these mathematical expressions and so we
lose some information we're being less precise
when we're talking about these General words
but nevertheless that's enough for us to still be
able to draw the conclusions that we want to draw
so let's ask some questions first question might
be how many mathematical Expressions can we form
with our k equal 16 symbols which have length
say capital M how many mathematical expressions
of length M can we make well for us that's
too hard okay that would be a entire Theory
and trying to figure out which combinations
of symbols are valid mathematical expressions
and which aren't so that's too hard so let's ask a
simpler question how many words of length M can we
make with our 16 symbols okay so that's relatively
easy because it's just a counting problem exactly
of the kind that we've talked about in this series
relatively recently it's in fact the first of our
four fundamental counting problems we're just
counting the number of M lists from K because
if we're talking about a word from these K symbols
well it means that we're talking about a list okay
and this list has entries from K well from these
K 16 symbols and the total length of the list is
M so the number there is K to the m we can have K
choices for the first entry of our list K choices
for the second entry all the way up to K choices
for the MTH entry and so we have to multiply all
those together we get K to the M these are the
number of M lists from K or in other words the
number of possible words of length M irrespective
of whether they actually form valid arithmetical
expressions or not okay how about the number of
words of length less than or equal to M this is
the number of words of length exactly M so we
have the case when the word length is say zero
in which case say there's only one word uh the
empty word if the m is equal to one then there
are K such lists if m is equal to 2 Then There
are K squar such lists and so on all the way up
to uh M where we have K to the m such lists so
we're just using this expression to sum from 0
to M of this expression now this is a geometric
series okay it's a geometric series with a sort
of common ratio of K and so there is a standard
formula for that that we've seen and it's K to
the m + 1 -1 over kus1 so I remind you that k
for us is actually 16 but we'll keep on using k
for now so this expression here we can simplify
it a little bit because this numerator is less
than or equal to K to the n + 1 if we just drop
this minus one that we're making things a little
bit bigger we'll keep the denominator as it is
so this to this is a valid inequality and now
just to make things a little bit easier as well
we're going to increase It Again by in this case
decreasing the denominator so from here to
here we increased the numerator from here to
here we're going to decrease the denominator if we
decrease the denominator it means that the actual
expression gets bigger and we're going to decrease
the denominator from kus1 to k/ 2 so K is 16 K - 1
is 15 K over 2 is down to about an 8 okay so
we're going from 15 to 8 in the denominator that
increases the expression overall and the advantage
in doing that is that now we can cancel a little
bit because the two can come up there and this K
and the one of the ks up here Will will cancel so
we'll just get 2 * K to the m so this analysis
shows that if we're interested in the number of
words of length up to including M then it's less
than or equal to 2 * K to the m which is exactly
two times what we got in that previous question
and now let's just State an obvious consequence
of what we just done which is that there are
most 2 * K to the m numbers n whenever I say
number here I'm talking about natural numbers
with complexity C of n less than or equal to
M why well there are at most 2 * K to the m words
in the K symbols of length at most M that's what
we've just established so that's a limit on the
total number of words that we can make with our
16 or k symbols so there are at most this number
of arithmetical expressions in the K symbols
of length less than or equal to M because an
arithmetical expression is just a special kind of
word and so there are at most 2 * K to the m
numbers in natural numbers of complexity C of
n less than or equal to M because these
arithmetic Expressions that we've just
counted up here correspond to or evaluate
to natural numbers and so there's at most
2 * K the M such numbers of complexity
less than or equal to M so for example
there are at most 2 * 16 500 numbers n of
complexity C of n less than or equal to
500 we interested the number of numbers whose
complexity is less than or equal to 500 so the
numbers themselves could be very big involving
triangles of triangles of triangles and so on
but the number of such numbers whose complexity is
less than equal to 500 is bounded by this number
here this is an upper limit to the number
of mathematical Expressions that we can
make with our 16 symbols of total length less
than or equal to 500 this is still a very big
number but we have some control over it now
we're going to need another simple question
how many numbers have digit length less than or
equal to n and just to make the answer a little
bit uh simpler let's include zero here in this
counting so we're talking about a certain number
of Digit lengths it's capital N how many numbers
are there the answer is 10 the N because in each
of the the digit places we can put one of
our 10 digits 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 or eight or
9 okay and now we're in a position to
ask the question that's really at the
heart of this lecture and that's this one
here what fraction of the numbers n with
digit length less than or equal to n have
complexity C of n less than or equal to M
so we're assuming we have two numbers m and
n and we'll suppose that n is bigger than M
okay and we're asking okay how many numbers
of size or digit length less than or equal to
n have complexity which is at most M so we're
interested in sort of What proportion of the
all the numbers of length n can we compress
efficiently using our Ari metical Expressions
involving our 16 symbols to have complexity
actually less than or equal to this fixed
M okay so we're talking about a ratio here of
numbers whose complexity is less than equal
to M divided by all of the numbers that we're
considering so the total number of numbers that
we're considering is just the number of n whose
uh whose total number of digits is less than or
equal to n that's this 10 to the N that we've
just found so that's the denominator of this
expression and the numerator is well the number
of numbers with digit length less than or equal
to n which has complexity less than or equal to
M and we're going to observe that this condition
of having digits n less than or equal to capital
N can be removed so if we remove this condition
we're increasing the number of numbers we're
increasing this numerator so when we going from
here to here what I'm doing is I'm just dropping
this condition and we're just replacing it with
this number of n such that the complexity of n
is less than or equal to capital M right so here
we're no longer restricting ourselves to numbers
of a digit length less than or equal to capital N
we're just considering all uh natural numbers
that have this property and we're doing that
because we've just counted that in the previous
slide that was less than or equal to 2 * K to the
m so altogether this fraction of numbers is some
number which is less than or equal to 2 * K to the
M over 10 the n and I remind you that for us
K is actually 16 but this argument would work
even if K was something different if K was 20
or 30 or something else let's have a look at an
example so suppose n is 20 and M is 10 so we're
considering numbers with 20 digits or less and
we're interested in what proportion of all those
numbers have complexity less than or equal to
10 okay then we've just seen that this proportion
whatever it is is less than this number here 2 * k
the M over 10 the N now K is 16 m is 10 and
capital N is 20 if we look at this for a second
we see that we can simplify it because 16 happens
to be 4 squared so this 16 to the 10 is the same
as 4 to the 20 so we get 4 20 over 10 20 that's
the same as 4 over 10 20 * 2 of course of course
and then we can simplify things a little bit more
because we're only interested in rough estimates
here so the 4 over 10 is a little bit less than
a half so we can replace it with a half then
things get bigger if we replace it with a half
then we get 1 over 2 20 so altogether 1 over 2
19 so for example here is a random number that
I've just made up with 20 digits so if we take
a random number like this we ask what's the
probability that the complexity of this number
is actually less than or equal to 10 that we
can write it in some fashion or another using
multiplications exponentials and triangular
numbers with a total of less than or equal to
10 symbols so here we actually need 1 2 3 4 five
six for the exponent which is sort of implicit
here but you actually need the exponent if you're
going to write things out then 7 8 9 10 so this
number would have complexity 10 so we're stating
that the probability of that happening is less
than 1 in 2 to 19 a very very small probability
so being able to compress a number of 20 digits
to something only involving 10 symbols is highly
unlikely or highly difficult highly improbable so
let's just generalize that last example so when n
was exactly 2 * m then we saw there was some kind
of nice relation that could be easily summarized
then the proportion of numbers with less than or
equal to capital N digits that can be compressed
to have complexity less than or equal to m is at
most so here's our general Expression 2 * K to
the m/ 10 the n and we see we can write that as
2 * 16 to the m now over 10 to the 2 m because
we're replacing n with 2 m okay the 16 to the
m is the same as 4 to the 2m and so we get 4 over
10 to the 2m or the same as 25s to the N because
n equals 2 m and this is less than 2 * 12 to the N
same thing that we just did in the previous thing
and we get the same thing kind of thing that
we just did we get 1 over 2 to the capital N
minus1 so we have concluded the following
relatively simple relatively crude estimate
which is that the probability that a number of
capital N digits can be compressed to half that
number in other words to M which is n /2 using
our 16 symbols is less than 1 / 2 to the capital
nus1 so this is a special case when we're
just interested in asking How likely is it
to be able to compress to half the original size
of the number How likely is that and the answer
is if n is large it's not very likely it's very
difficult to compress a number which is this long
to a number which is this long if we have lots and
lots of digits it's a huge compression that's very
unlikely this has very important ramifications for
us in mathematics so I'm inviting you to wake up
to the reality of what's really happening here
in modern mathematics in this series I want you
to open your eyes to seeing things the way they
really are not the way that we've been led to
believe by repetition habit wishful thinking what
we're going to see now is a very important aspect
of that that the nature of the natural numbers is
much more complicated than we think it is and that
even relatively small numbers in the vast Pantheon
of things like Zed 10 triangle 10 + 23 poses huge
problems for us huge problems and all of our
proofs and number Theory stat ments we start
to realize or become problematic once we get into
this range okay so this what we're doing here has
enormous implications for the validity of or the
extent of the validity of modern number Theory
and a lot of other things too so here's a bit of
a pictorial summary of what we've just done using
our very rough and somewhat crude uh estimation
of this complexity function so maybe I should
label these things here is our number n and here
as usual is our complexity C of n okay so we're
plotting C of n um as a function of N and we're
pretending that this is something of a linear
scale and so I have 10 triangle 10 here as this
bound and right adjacent to it is zal 10 triangle
10 + 23 of course if this was a linear scale you
wouldn't be able to tell the difference there and
I'm also cheating in that I've identified 10
triangle 4 which is kind of a nice number for
us um and sort of made it a lot bigger than it
actually ought to appear and on this scale here
we have a 10 triangle n up here which will be
the rough complexity of most of these numbers
in here and I'm claiming that this complexity
graph looks very roughly something like this
that most of the time it hovers around here and
every soften it plummets down dramatically okay
now what we have just learned is the following
that if we call this number capital N so this is
representing the number of digits of the numbers
that we're considering and half of that is say m
that's just literally half of that number so in
the large scheme of things uh there's not much
difference between these two things because
for example 10 triangle 8 would be far below
them but anyway let's pict sure M as roughly
half there and in that green line there then
what we just determined is that the probability
of taking some number in this range and getting
a complexity Which is less than or equal to
M that's the halfway point that probability
is something like 1 over 2 to the 10 triangle n
10 triangle n is the number n actually there was
a minus one here wasn't there but we're going to
forget about that - one okay so the basic point is
that the probability of choosing something in
here and getting a complexity even below this
absurdly huge number is absurdly small this is a
ridiculously small probability so the chances of
this happening are you know 0.00000000 I'd have to
go on for Quad zillions of quillians of quillians
of universe eras uh before I even got close
to where I could put something nonzero in that
expression so the conclusion is that most numbers
less most numbers now in quotes notice I'm putting
them in quotes now most numbers less than Zed
cannot be written down in our universe with our
16 symbols if we just restrict ourselves to
the 16 symbols that we have at hand and ask
ourselves elves you know which of these numbers
can we actually write down because our visible
universe as I'm going to talk about more in my
next lecture is uh it's a small band here maybe
around 10 triangle 4 if we're lucky far below 10
triangle 9/ two so in other words the the number
of numbers whose complexity comes down into our
visible range is just a minuscule a minuscule
proportion of all these numbers when we bump into
something like 10 triangle 8 or 10 triangle 8 plus
3495 that's an absurdly special uh remarkable
number totally atypical of the vast majority of
them which are invisible to us now this raises
a lot of serious questions uh people okay if a
number is invisible to us if we cannot write
it down in any fashion whatsoever well here
actually we're not talking about any fashion
whatsoever we're talking about just using these
particular 16 symbols but in our next lecture
we're going to see that basically this argument
extends quite simply to more General situation
we're going to really run into this problem of
of the nature of numbers themselves we're going
to have to reconsider what we actually mean by a
number is it right to talk about some number
in this range which we have no hope of writing
down in our universe is that really a number
all kinds of interesting scientific questions
arise here maybe also philosophical ones but in
any case the framework of number theory of our
usual arithmetic of our standard orientation is
shaken up considerably by this kind of relatively
simple analysis it's an analysis that should be
much more commonly known and shown to students
because first of all it's interesting it relates
to sort of computational issues quite directly
and obviously it relates to Notions of compression
and Science and as we'll see in our next video to
actually considerations about the size of the
universe the question of how big the universe
is starts to impact with what we can write
down mathematically and so perhaps what we
are capable of theorizing about mathematically
so I want to talk a little bit about that in
our next video hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening